docs/configuration/auth.md, before:

---
summary: "Control UI authentication: mandatory email/password and JWT sessions"
read_when:
  - Enabling or troubleshooting the Control UI login
  - Configuring AUTH_EMAIL and AUTH_PASSWORD
title: "Control UI Authentication"
---

# Control UI Authentication

Control UI authentication is **mandatory**. The gateway does not start unless both `AUTH_EMAIL` and `AUTH_PASSWORD` are set. Users must sign in with email and password before accessing the web UI.

## Architecture

The system uses a **unified JWT**:

- **Access token**: Short-lived JWT (default 15 minutes) kept in browser memory only. Used for HTTP `Authorization: Bearer` and WebSocket `connect.auth.token`.
- **Refresh token**: Long-lived opaque token (default 7 days) in an HttpOnly, SameSite=Strict cookie. Used to obtain new access tokens without re-entering credentials.

## Quick start

Set both environment variables, then run the gateway:

```bash
export AUTH_EMAIL="admin@example.com"
export AUTH_PASSWORD="your-secure-password"
openclaw gateway run
```

Open the Control UI (e.g. http://localhost:18789). You will see the login page; after signing in, the full app and WebSocket connection use the same JWT.

## Environment variables

| Variable                  | Required | Default        | Description                                                  |
| ------------------------- | -------- | -------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `AUTH_EMAIL`              | Yes      | -              | Admin email (used as login identity)                         |
| `AUTH_PASSWORD`           | Yes      | -              | Admin password (plain text)                                  |
| `AUTH_ACCESS_TOKEN_TTL`   | No       | `15m`          | Access token lifetime (e.g. `15m`, `1h`)                     |
| `AUTH_REFRESH_TOKEN_TTL`  | No       | `7d`           | Refresh token lifetime (e.g. `7d`, `24h`)                    |
| `AUTH_JWT_SECRET`         | No       | Auto-generated | JWT signing secret (min 256 bits recommended for production) |
| `AUTH_COOKIE_SECURE`      | No       | `true`         | Set to `false` for HTTP localhost development                |
| `AUTH_RATE_LIMIT_ENABLED` | No       | `true`         | Enable login/refresh rate limiting                           |
| `AUTH_RATE_LIMIT_STRICT`  | No       | `false`        | Always enforce rate limits (even behind proxy)               |

### Duration formats

Token TTL values support:

- `15m` – 15 minutes
- `1h` – 1 hour
- `7d` – 7 days
- `3600` – seconds when no unit is given

## Security recommendations

### Production

1. **HTTPS** – Use HTTPS; auth cookies are Secure in production (except localhost).
2. **JWT secret** – Set a strong random secret, e.g. `AUTH_JWT_SECRET=$(openssl rand -base64 32)`.
3. **Password** – Use a strong password (e.g. from a password manager).
4. **Rate limiting** – Keep it enabled to limit brute force.
5. **Token lifetimes** – Keep access tokens short (e.g. 15m) and refresh tokens reasonable (e.g. 7d).

### Development (HTTP localhost)

```bash
export AUTH_EMAIL="admin@example.com"
export AUTH_PASSWORD="dev-password"
export AUTH_COOKIE_SECURE="false"
openclaw gateway run
```

## Rate limiting

Failed login attempts are limited:

- **Limit**: 5 attempts per 5 minutes per IP
- **Block**: 15 minutes after exceeding the limit
- The UI shows a countdown when rate limited

## Troubleshooting

### "Control UI authentication is required"

The gateway refuses to start when auth is not configured.

- Ensure both `AUTH_EMAIL` and `AUTH_PASSWORD` are set and exported.
- Check for typos and trailing spaces.
- Restart the gateway after setting variables.

### Token refresh fails or repeated logouts

- Confirm the browser sends the refresh cookie (e.g. in DevTools, Application → Cookies).
- For HTTP (no HTTPS), set `AUTH_COOKIE_SECURE=false`.
- Ensure the gateway is receiving the cookie (check server logs).

### Rate limited

- Wait for the countdown to finish (up to 15 minutes).
- Verify the password; avoid automated or repeated login attempts.

### CORS or WebSocket auth errors

- Use the same origin for the Control UI and gateway.
- Ensure the access token is sent (e.g. in WebSocket `connect.auth.token` and HTTP `Authorization: Bearer`).

Commit message:

added auth fix with md updates

docs/configuration/auth.md, after:

---
summary: "Control UI authentication: mandatory email/password and JWT sessions"
read_when:
  - Enabling or troubleshooting the Control UI login
  - Configuring AUTH_EMAIL and AUTH_PASSWORD
title: "Control UI Authentication"
---

# Control UI Authentication

Control UI authentication is **mandatory**. The gateway does not start unless both `AUTH_EMAIL` and `AUTH_PASSWORD` are set. Users must sign in with email and password before accessing the web UI.

## Architecture

The system uses a **unified JWT**:

- **Access token**: Short-lived JWT (default 15 minutes) kept in browser memory only. Used for HTTP `Authorization: Bearer` and WebSocket `connect.auth.token`.
- **Refresh token**: Long-lived opaque token (default 7 days) in an HttpOnly, SameSite=Strict cookie. Used to obtain new access tokens without re-entering credentials.

## Quick start

Set both environment variables, then run the gateway:

```bash
export AUTH_EMAIL="admin@example.com"
export AUTH_PASSWORD="your-secure-password"
openclaw gateway run
```

Open the Control UI (e.g. http://localhost:18789). You will see the login page; after signing in, the full app and WebSocket connection use the same JWT.

## Environment variables

| Variable                  | Required | Default        | Description                                                  |
| ------------------------- | -------- | -------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `AUTH_EMAIL`              | Yes      | -              | Admin email (used as login identity)                         |
| `AUTH_PASSWORD`           | Yes      | -              | Admin password (plain text)                                  |
| `AUTH_ACCESS_TOKEN_TTL`   | No       | `15m`          | Access token lifetime (e.g. `15m`, `1h`)                     |
| `AUTH_REFRESH_TOKEN_TTL`  | No       | `7d`           | Refresh token lifetime (e.g. `7d`, `24h`)                    |
| `AUTH_JWT_SECRET`         | No       | Auto-generated | JWT signing secret (min 256 bits recommended for production) |
| `AUTH_COOKIE_SECURE`      | No       | `true`         | Set to `false` for HTTP localhost development                |
| `AUTH_RATE_LIMIT_ENABLED` | No       | `true`         | Enable login/refresh rate limiting                           |
| `AUTH_RATE_LIMIT_STRICT`  | No       | `false`        | Always enforce rate limits (even behind proxy)               |

### Duration formats

Token TTL values support:

- `15m` – 15 minutes
- `1h` – 1 hour
- `7d` – 7 days
- `3600` – seconds when no unit is given

## Security recommendations

### Production

1. **HTTPS** – Use HTTPS; auth cookies are Secure in production (except localhost).
2. **JWT secret** – Set a strong random secret, e.g. `AUTH_JWT_SECRET=$(openssl rand -base64 32)`.
3. **Password** – Use a strong password (e.g. from a password manager).
4. **Rate limiting** – Keep it enabled to limit brute force.
5. **Token lifetimes** – Keep access tokens short (e.g. 15m) and refresh tokens reasonable (e.g. 7d).

### Development (HTTP localhost)

```bash
export AUTH_EMAIL="admin@example.com"
export AUTH_PASSWORD="dev-password"
export AUTH_COOKIE_SECURE="false"
openclaw gateway run
```

## Rate limiting

Failed login attempts are limited:

- **Limit**: 5 attempts per 5 minutes per IP
- **Block**: 15 minutes after exceeding the limit
- The UI shows a countdown when rate limited

## CLI and local connections

The **Control UI** (browser) must sign in with email and password and use the JWT for all HTTP and WebSocket requests. When you run the CLI, node host, or other tools (e.g. Cursor) on the **same machine** as the gateway, they can connect to the gateway WebSocket using the legacy gateway token or password from config:

- Set `gateway.auth.token` in your config (or `OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_TOKEN` in the environment), or
- Set `gateway.auth.password` (or `OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_PASSWORD`)

Connections from **local loopback** (localhost / 127.0.0.1) from these non-browser clients will be allowed to use that token or password for WebSocket auth. Remote connections must use a JWT (obtained via the Control UI login flow). This keeps CLI and tools working on the gateway host without implementing JWT refresh in those clients.

## Troubleshooting

### "Control UI authentication is required"

The gateway refuses to start when auth is not configured.

- Ensure both `AUTH_EMAIL` and `AUTH_PASSWORD` are set and exported.
- Check for typos and trailing spaces.
- Restart the gateway after setting variables.

### Token refresh fails or repeated logouts

- Confirm the browser sends the refresh cookie (e.g. in DevTools, Application → Cookies).
- For HTTP (no HTTPS), set `AUTH_COOKIE_SECURE=false`.
- Ensure the gateway is receiving the cookie (check server logs).

### Rate limited

- Wait for the countdown to finish (up to 15 minutes).
- Verify the password; avoid automated or repeated login attempts.

### CORS or WebSocket auth errors

- Use the same origin for the Control UI and gateway.
- Ensure the access token is sent (e.g. in WebSocket `connect.auth.token` and HTTP `Authorization: Bearer`).
